---
layout: post
title:  "Exploratory Data Analysis: Major Natural Disasters"
date:   2022-11-21
author: Scotty Zambrano
description: A look through the process called Exploratory Data Analysis, or as you may have seen it before, EDA. 
image: /assets/images/LinearRegression.png
---

When it comes to EDA, there are two major steps; cleaning the data and exploring the data. These two essential steps in the EDA proccess is how you can quickly learn a lot about your data. This post will focus mainly on the second step but I will quickly go through the first step as it is very necessary. We will use the Natural Disasters dataset that we scrapped in the previous post. This dataset consists of information about every major natural disaster along with their year, type of disaster, death toll, damage cost, an article title, locations, and notes. 

# Cleaning the Data

This dataset has two columns of quantitative data but both of those columns are filled with symbols, missing values, and different metrics of measurement. To make use of these columns we first needed to remove all symbols (ie. >, -, +, $, etc.), fix the metrics, and then fill the missing values. To remove symbols I used code like: 

`df['Damage costUS$'] = df['Damage costUS$'].str.replace('$', '')`

To fix metrics I had to extract strings out of the column and then multiply the quantitative data by the correcct amount. For example, the cost column had all individual values entered followed by either "million" or "billion" such as; "3.1 million" or "2.4 billion". To not accidently create plots so the 3.1 is bigger than the 2.4 I multiplied each value by the associated amount. In this dataset I made the million unit the base values, meaning I multiplied all of those values by 1 and all of the billion values by 1000. Example code for this is below:

`df['cost mil'] = np.where(df['value']=='mil', 1, 0)`

`df['cost bil'] = np.where(df['value']=='bil', 1000, 0)`

`df['cost mi'] = np.where(df['value']=='mi', 1, 0)`

`df['cost bi'] = np.where(df['value']=='bi', 1000, 0)`

`df['cost th'] = np.where(df['value']=='th', 0.001, 0)`


`df['Cost Mult'] = df['cost mil'] + df['cost bil'] + df['cost mi'] + df['cost bi'] + df['cost th']`

`df['Total Cost'] = df['Cost'].astype(float) * df['Cost Mult']`

There are multiple ways to fill the missing values within a dataset. Common methods include filling the missing values with the mean or median of the column of which the missing value is found, or filling the missing values with the conditional mean of associated values within the row. Example code is below: 

`df['Total Cost'].fillna(100, inplace=True)`

Once the dataset is cleaned and tidy, exploring the data through some EDA is much more simple. In our dataset we will continue with a smaller dataset with columns: year, disaster, death toll, total cost, value (million or billion), and first affected location. 

# Exploring with plots

